post: Upgradeable contracts (#84)
cloudx-labs/posts: posts/frangeris/04.upgradeable-contracts.md

---
title: "Upgradeable smart contracts"
published: false
description:
tags: ""
cover_image: ./assets/04.cover.png
series: "Your own payments gateway, powered by smart contracts"
---

## The basis

This series assumes you have a basic understanding of the smart contracts development and the Ethereum or EVM compatible blockchains, also have a local development setup already working. If you are not familiar with these topics, please read the [Introduction to smart contracts](https://ethereum.org/en/smart-contracts/) to start.

> One of the most popular implementations of smart contracts today is the [ERC20](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-20) token standard. It is a set of rules that defines how a token contract should behave. It is a standard that allows different applications to interact with the token knowing how it works. For example, a wallet application can display the balance of a token, or a decentralized exchange can trade it. The standard creates and endless possibilities of functionalities that can be built on top of it.

Author: Yea, I prefer `It is`, cuz is the standard that I'm referring to, `this` would requires a little more context in the same paragraph, 2nd suggestion is better, I agree

![Meme about how proxy is behind scenes](./assets/04.image.1.png)

More technical documentation can be found on the [Solidity docs](https://docs.soliditylang.org/en/v0.8.20/introduction-to-smart-contracts.html#delegatecall-and-libraries).

> When working with upgradeable contracts using OpenZeppelin Upgrades, there are a few minor caveats to keep in mind when writing your Solidity code.
>
> It’s worth mentioning that these restrictions have their roots in how the Ethereum VM works, and apply to all projects that work with upgradeable contracts, not just OpenZeppelin Upgrades.

Some of the caveats of using the proxy pattern are:

1. Initializers: Contructors are not allowed in upgradeable contracts, instead we need to use the `initialize` function from the `Initializable` contract. This function is called only once when the contract is deployed for the first time. This means that we need to use the `initializer` modifier in the `initialize` function.

> 2. Extending from upgradeable contracts libraries: Following the same logic, we need to use the `initializer` modifier when extending from upgradeable contracts libraries for libraries that we are extending from.

Reviewer: I don't really understand the idea here. Which are the libraries "_we are extending from_"??
In any case, if you extend _from_ something, it sounds to me that the second preposition should be _to_

Author: A smart contract is like a `class`, you can use inheritance in the same way we do in OOP

Reviewer: Alright then. So maybe this could be written this way:

```suggestion
2. Extending from upgradeable contracts libraries: Following the same logic, we need to use the `initializer` modifier when extending from upgradeable contract libraries.
```

> 2. Extending from upgradeable contracts libraries: Following the same logic, we need to use the `initializer` modifier when extending from upgradeable contracts libraries for libraries that we are extending from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Extending from upgradeable contract libraries: Following the same logic, we need to use the `initializer` modifier when extending from upgradeable contracts libraries for libraries that we are extending from.
```
I'm 90% sure about this one

Author: Same, there are libraries that have open source EIPs that we can extend from, when these cases happen, the same issue comes in, not being able to use constructors

3. Initial values and fields declarations: We need to be careful when declaring fields in our contracts, because the initial values are not set when the contract is deployed. This means that we need to set the initial values in the `initialize` function.

> 4. Initialization of implemented contracts: As constructors are disabled when working with upgradeability, while extending from a contract, we call the function that "initialize" instead of calling the parent via `super`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Initialization of implemented contracts: As constructors are disabled when working with upgradeability, we call the function that "initializes" the contract instead of the parent via `super` while extending from another one.
```

Reviewer: I think _the contract_ is the thing being initialized; if not, sth else should be used after _initialize_.

Author: Not sure about this one, I want to emphasize the `super` issue

5. Not `selfdestruct` or `delegatecall` implemented: These functions are not supported in upgradeable contracts to avoid breaking the proxy pattern or opening a door to security issues.

More detailed information can be found in the [OpenZeppelin Upgrades documentation](https://docs.openzeppelin.com/upgrades-plugins/1.x/writing-upgradeable).

## The implementation

> To give the ability of upgradeability to our "Gateway" (in case something goes wrong or need to change), we need to use the proxy pattern. So let's start by creating and deploying a `Gateway.sol` contract:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To give the ability of upgradeability to our "Gateway" (in case something goes wrong or needs to be changed), we need to use the proxy pattern. So let's start by creating and deploying a `Gateway.sol` contract:
```

```solidity
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
pragma solidity ^0.8.18;

import "@openzeppelin/contracts-upgradeable/proxy/utils/Initializable.sol";
import "@openzeppelin/contracts-upgradeable/access/OwnableUpgradeable.sol";

contract Gateway is Initializable, OwnableUpgradeable {
  uint private fee;

  function initialize(uint _fee) public initializer {
    fee = _fee;
    __Ownable_init();
  }

  function getFee() public view returns (uint) {
    return fee;
  }
}
```

This contract is very simple, it has a `fee` variable that can be set by the owner of the contract. This is the contract that we are going to be upgrading.

> To deploy the contract we need to use the `deployProxy` function from the `@openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades` plugin. This function will deploy the proxy contract and initialize it with the `initialize` function from the `Gateway` contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To deploy it we need to use the `deployProxy` function from the `@openzeppelin/hardhat-upgrades` plugin. This function will deploy the proxy contract and initialize it with the `initialize` function from the `Gateway` contract.
```

> To keep things simple and visible (in case you cant deploy), we will use [Sepolia testnet](https://sepolia.dev/) blockchain and [Hardhat](https://hardhat.org/) as development environment, so to configure hardhat to use sepolia we need to add the following configuration to the `hardhat.config.js` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To keep things simple and visible (in case you cant deploy), we will use [Sepolia testnet](https://sepolia.dev/) blockchain and [Hardhat](https://hardhat.org/) as development environment, so to configure Hardhat for the use of Sepolia we need to add the following configuration to the `hardhat.config.js` file:
```

Author: `for the` is not correct here, sepolia is just a network that hardhat connect to, `hardhat doesn't "makes use" of sepolia`, hardhat "use" sepolia

```javascript
  networks: {
    sepolia: {
      url: 'https://rpc.sepolia.org/',

      // take the private key from the first account in the ganache-accounts
      accounts: [process.env.ACCOUNT_PRIVATE_KEY!],
    },
  },
```

> Then we can tell hardhat to run the deployment script while specifying the network to use:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then we can tell Hardhat to run the deployment script while specifying the network to use:
```

```bash
npx hardhat run scripts/deploy.js --network sepolia
```

![Output of deploy script](./assets/04.image.2.png)

> You should be able to see the same transaction on [Sepolia Block Explorer](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/0x10Ccb5C22C6Ccc78F6B5dfbCB36Ea13bF60d2Ecf), now let's take a look at the transactions details (lookup your wallet address in etherscan), `3` contracts were created:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should be able to see the same transaction on [Sepolia Block Explorer](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/0x10Ccb5C22C6Ccc78F6B5dfbCB36Ea13bF60d2Ecf). Now let's take a look at the transactions details (lookup your wallet address in etherscan), `3` contracts were created:
```

1. `TransparentUpgradeableProxy`: This is the proxy contract that will be used to interact with the Gateway contract, [see it here](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/0xe7197e1d5f60ee3745a828a4ceadaa0fbfff886d#code).
2. `ProxyAdmin`: This contract is used to manage the proxy contracts (admin / upgrades), [see it here](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/0xe754bdb16e0fc27d5d405432c523099c2c9050b2#code).
3. `Gateway`: This is the logic contract that will be used by `TransparentUpgradeableProxy`, [see it here](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/address/0x739af28dfecd11067f5be66f56f3fb37403c496f#code).

> > Note that Gateway contract code is not available as the others, only the bytecode is shown, this is because it was deployed by the proxy, to be able to see the real code you can verify and publish it via hardhat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Note that Gateway contract code is not available as the others: only the bytecode is shown. This is because it was deployed by the proxy; to be able to see the real code you can verify and publish it via hardhat.
```

Any future interaction with the `Gateway` contract will be done via the `TransparentUpgradeableProxy` contract, so let's try to interact with it. To do so, let's use `hardhat console` to interact with the blockchain:

```bash
npx hardhat console --network sepolia
```

> Why specifying the network? Because we need to tell hardhat which network to use to interact with the blockchain, in this case we are using the `sepolia` network, also we will use `ethersjs` to interact with the deployed contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Why specify the network? Because we need to tell Hardhat which network to use to interact with the blockchain. In this case we are using the `sepolia` network and we will also use `ethersjs` to interact with the deployed contract.
```

```bash
frang @ ~/Code/posts-examples/payments-gateway (master)
 →  npx hardhat console --network sepolia
Welcome to Node.js v14.18.1.
Type ".help" for more information.
> const proxy = await ethers.getContractFactory("Gateway")
undefined
> const gateway = await proxy.attach("0xe7197e1D5F60eE3745a828a4CeaDAA0FBfFF886D")
undefined
> (await gateway.getFee()).toString()
'1'
>
```

> As you can see, we are able to interact with the `Gateway` contract via the `TransparentUpgradeableProxy` contract, but what if we want to upgrade the `Gateway` contract? Let's add support to allows the owner to change the fee, so let's create `GatewayV2.sol`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, we are able to interact with the `Gateway` contract via the `TransparentUpgradeableProxy` contract, but what if we want to upgrade the `Gateway` contract? Let's add support to allow the owner to change the fee by creating `GatewayV2.sol`:
```

```bash
frang @ ~/Code/posts-examples/payments-gateway (master)
 →  PROXY_ADDRESS=0xe7197e1D5F60eE3745a828a4CeaDAA0FBfFF886D npx hardhat run scripts/upgrade.js --network sepolia
Upgrading...
Upgraded: 0xe7197e1D5F60eE3745a828a4CeaDAA0FBfFF886D
```

The contract was upgraded, but how can we verify that? Let's try to interact with the contract again BUT this time we will use the `GatewayV2` contract instead of the `Gateway` contract while using the same contract address:

```bash
frang @ ~/Code/posts-examples/payments-gateway (master)
 →  npx hardhat console --network sepolia
Welcome to Node.js v14.18.1.
Type ".help" for more information.
> const proxy = await ethers.getContractFactory("GatewayV2")
undefined
> const gateway = await proxy.attach("0xe7197e1D5F60eE3745a828a4CeaDAA0FBfFF886D")
undefined
> (await gateway.getFee()).toString()
'1'
> await gateway.setFee([2])
{
  hash: '0x699ad32e17ca56537d69c60ff4727526f031f53ca46775dad535d37300055cda',
  ...
}
> (await gateway.getFee()).toString()
'2'
```

> The contract now has the `setFee` function, so we can change the fee, but how can we verify that the contract was upgraded? Let's take a look at the transaction details on [Sepolia Block Explorer](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/tx/0xc0ea9e236e0aea3534bd060fd081468c39649d0fb00cb44b19e241c85338757b#eventlog), you should be able to see the `Upgraded` event, this event is emitted when the `Gateway` contract was upgraded to the `GatewayV2` contract.

Reviewer: I believe we've already told how to check if the contract was actually upgraded. Are we checking a different thing this time?

Author: No, an event in the blockchain is the main source of truth to really assure that the upgrade method was executed, also is important to understand and look for events on blockchain logs

Author: The first way to check if the contract was upgraded is by calling the new method, but after that, we also have another way to check that it was upgraded, this way consists in checking inside the blockchain, that's why

> The contract now has the `setFee` function, so we can change the fee, but how can we verify that the contract was upgraded? Let's take a look at the transaction details on [Sepolia Block Explorer](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/tx/0xc0ea9e236e0aea3534bd060fd081468c39649d0fb00cb44b19e241c85338757b#eventlog), you should be able to see the `Upgraded` event, this event is emitted when the `Gateway` contract was upgraded to the `GatewayV2` contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contract now has the `setFee` function, so we can change the fee, but how can we verify that the contract was upgraded? Let's take a look at the transaction details on [Sepolia Block Explorer](https://sepolia.etherscan.io/tx/0xc0ea9e236e0aea3534bd060fd081468c39649d0fb00cb44b19e241c85338757b#eventlog), you should be able to see the `Upgraded` event. This event is emitted when the `Gateway` contract was upgraded to the `GatewayV2` contract.
```

> And that's it, we have the first contract for the payments gateway that can be upgraded, but what if we want to add more features to the contract? We can do that by creating a new contract that have the same interface as previous contracts, then just add the new features, deploy it and upgrade the proxy contract to the new contract, this way we can add new features without breaking the existing ones, with the upgradeable part covered, let's move to the next part.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's it, we have the first contract for the payments gateway that can be upgraded, but what if we want to add more features to the contract? We can do that by creating a new contract that have the same interface as previous contracts, then just add the new features, deploy it and upgrade the proxy contract to the new contract; this way we can add new features without breaking the existing ones.
With the upgradeable part covered, let's move to the next part.
```
